Add 23rd Release blog article (#8538)
lampepfl/dotty: docs/blog/_posts/2020-03-18-23rd-dotty-milestone-release.md

---
layout: blog-page
title: Announcing Dotty 0.23.0-RC1 - safe initialization checks, type-level bitwise operations and more
author: Anatolii Kmetiuk
authorImg: /images/anatolii.png
date: 2020-03-18
---

Hello! We are excited to announce 0.23.0-RC1 of Dotty. This version brings safe initialization checks, minor syntactic changes related to the context parameters, type-level bitwise operations and improvements of the metaprogramming capabilities.

You can try out this version right now, from the comfort of your SBT, by visiting the [home page](https://dotty.epfl.ch/) and scrolling down to the "Create a Dotty Project" section.

Alternatively, you can try this version of Scala online via [Scastie](https://scastie.scala-lang.org/). Once you're there, click "Build Settings" and set "Target" to "Dotty".

Enjoy the ride🚀!

<!--more-->
# Cool new features

> ## Safe initialization checks

Author: /cc @liufengyun

> When a class is instantiated, its fields are initialized as described by the constructor of this class. Such a versatile language as Scala has a lot of features that give the programmer flexibility in describing their programs. However, a lot of features also bring extra complexity to the rules which describe in which order the initialization of the instances happen. We are talking about features such as inheritance, polymorphism, nested classes etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a class is instantiated, the fields in the class body are initialized by field initializers, which could be any Scala code. Such a versatile language feature gives the programmer flexibility in defining how objects are initialized. However, such flexibility also brings complexity to ensure that we never accidentally use a field before it's initialized. Initialization errors can be difficult to spot in the presence of complex language features, such as inheritance, traits, inner classes, and aliasing. Such errors, sometimes simple sometimes subtle, require programmer efforts to debug and fix, which has been a [pain point for Scala programmers](https://contributors.scala-lang.org/t/improve-forward-reference-handling/3616) for a long time.
```

> The added complexity of the initialization also means more responsibility on the programmer's part: they do not want to end up in a situation where a field is used before it is initialized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most programming languages do not statically check initialization safety, such as C++, Java, Kotlin, etc.
Or, they check initialization safety but overly restrict how objects are initialized, like Swift.
Now, Scala 3 has the best of two worlds: flexibility of initialization patterns and static check for safety.
```

Consider the following program:

```scala
abstract class AbstractFile {
   def name: String
   val extension: String = name.reverse.dropWhile(_ != '.').reverse
}

class RemoteFile(url: String) extends AbstractFile {
   val localFile: String = url.hashCode + ".tmp"
   def name: String = localFile
}
```

Above, `extension` value is initialized prior to `localFile` because the fields of the parents of a class are initialized prior to the fields of the class. However, `extension` uses `localFile` during its initialization since it accesses this field from the `name` method. This scenario will lead to a `NullPointerException` on runtime when the access to uninitialized `localFile` happens.

> The above example is just one of many. It is intended to illustrate that things can go wrong on initialization time if you are make a mistake with how you define the fields of your entities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I'd just remove this paragraph, it does not seem to convey more information.

In this release, we have added an aid for the programmer to detect such mistakes automatically. If you compile the above program with the `-Ycheck-init` flag, you will get the following compile-time error:

```scala
// -- Error: /Users/kmetiuk/Projects/scala3/pg/release/snip_4.scala:8:7 -----------
// 8 |   val localFile: String = url.hashCode + ".tmp"
//   |       ^
//   |Access non-initialized field localFile. Calling trace:
//   | -> val extension: String = name.reverse.dropWhile(_ != '.').reverse [ snip_4.scala:4 ]
//   |  -> def name: String = localFile  [ snip_4.scala:9 ]
// 1 error found
```

You can learn more about the feature from the [documentation](https://dotty.epfl.ch/0.23.0-RC1/docs/reference/other-new-features/safe-initialization.html). For the discussion, see PR [#7789](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/pull/7789).

> ## Bitwise Int compiletime operations

Author: /cc @bishabosha

In the previous release, Dotty has [received](https://dotty.epfl.ch/blog/2020/02/05/22nd-dotty-milestone-release.html#primitive-compiletime-operations-on-singleton-types) a support for type-level arithmetic operations on integers. In this release, we are extending this support by adding bitwise operations. For example:

```scala
import scala.compiletime.ops.int._

@main def Test =
  val t1: 1 << 1 = 2
  val t2: 1 << 2 = 4
  val t3: 1 << 3 = 8
  val t4: 1 << 4 = 0 // error
```

Above `t4` will fail to compile with the following error:

  -- [E007] Type Mismatch Error: /Users/kmetiuk/Projects/scala3/pg/release/snip_3.scala:7:20
7 |  val t67: 1 << 4 = 0 // error
  |                    ^
  |                    Found:    (0 : Int)
  |                    Required: (16 : Int)

> You can find the list of all the supported operations in the following file: https://github.com/bishabosha/dotty/blob/e2b0de0bf70bbde5a9a92dc7fa91b36537b02a87/library/src/scala/compiletime/ops/package.scala

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find the list of all the supported operations in the `scala.compiletime.ops` [package](https://github.com/bishabosha/dotty/blob/e2b0de0bf70bbde5a9a92dc7fa91b36537b02a87/library/src/scala/compiletime/ops/package.scala)
```

> # Syntactic Changes

Author: /cc @odersky

Previously, a context function was written as follows:

```scala
// OLD SYNTAX
val ctxFunOld = (x: String) ?=> x.toInt
```

Now, it is written as follows:

```scala
val ctxFunNew = (using x: String) => x.toInt
```

We hope that this change will improve the readability of context functions for a person who already knows the syntax for context parameters of ordinary methods.

## Drop `given` parameter syntax
As part of our experimentation with the syntax of the language, we are now dropping the old syntax for context parameters.

The old syntax for context parameters was as follows:

```scala
// OLD SYNTAX, NO LONGER SUPPORTED
def f(given x: Int) = x * x
```

In the previous release, it was [replaced](https://dotty.epfl.ch/blog/2020/02/05/22nd-dotty-milestone-release.html#further-improvements-to-the-context-parameters-syntax) by the new `using` syntax:

```scala
def f(using x: Int) = x * x
```

However, both syntaxes were supported for that release for experimental purposes. Now, we are dropping the support of the old syntax in favor of the new one as we see it as a clear win over the old one.

> # Metaprogramming

Author: /cc @nicolasstucki

```

The above program will give us a compile time error because it cannot find a context parameter of type `X`. This is because the `summon` function is not inline and hence the compiler needs to know that a context parameter of type `X` exists on call site of `summon` which happens to be in the body of `lookup`. Since `X` is unknown in that body, the compiler can't find the context parameter and shows an error.

We have now added an inline version of `summon`:

```scala
import scala.compiletime.summonInline

inline def lookup[X] =
  val x = summonInline[X]
  println(s"x = $x")

@main def Test =
  given Int = 10
  lookup[Int]
```

`summonInline` is an inline version of `summon`. It is defined as follows:

```scala
inline def summonInline[T] <: T = summonFrom {
  case t: T => t
}
```

Since it is inline, the context parameter is resolved on expansion site, not the call site. The expansion site happens to be wherever `lookup` function is expanded, and there the type `X` is bound to a concrete type.

## `ValueOfExpr` renamed to `Unlifted`
This feature allows you to obtain the value captured in an expression using pattern matching:

Macro.scala

```scala
import scala.quoted._

> inline def square(x: Int): Int = ${ squareImpl('x) }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
inline def square(inline x: Int): Int = ${ squareImpl('x) }
```

def squareImpl(x: Expr[Int])(using QuoteContext): Expr[Int] =
  x match
    case Unlifted(value: Int) => Expr(value * value)
```

Test.scala

```scala
@main def Test =

>   println(square(10))  // 100

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  println(square(10))  // println(100)
```

Author: In the comment, there's the runtime output that should be observed by the user. Not the result of the inlining which the user cannot observe.

Reviewer 3: But here the output is the code which is the part that is interesting to see

```

## Extractors for quotes moved under `scala.quoted` package
The metaprogramming capabilities are undergoing simplifications in this release. Particularly, you need to do less imports to use them.

Previously, to access the extractors for expressions you had to do the `scala.quoted.matching._` import. Now, the extractors from there have been moved to `scala.quoted`. For example, you can write the following program:

Macro.scala:

```scala
import scala.quoted._

inline def square(x: Int): Int = ${ squareImpl('x) }
def squareImpl(xExpr: Expr[Int])(using QuoteContext): Expr[Int] =
  xExpr match
    case Const(x) => Expr(x * x)
```

Test.scala:

```scala
@main def Test =

>   println(square(2))  // 4

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  println(square(2))  // println(4)
```

```

Above, `Const` is an extractor that matches constants. Notice how we do not need to import anything else but `scala.quoted._` to use it.

## TASTy Reflect imports simplified

> Previously, to access TASTy Reflect features of Dotty, you had to include an import as follows:

Reviewer 2: Maybe there should be a reference to the changes to implicit scope rules that allow this to happen

## Bitwise Int compiletime operations
In the previous release, Dotty has [received](https://dotty.epfl.ch/blog/2020/02/05/22nd-dotty-milestone-release.html#primitive-compiletime-operations-on-singleton-types) a support for type-level arithmetic operations on integers. In this release, we are extending this support by adding bitwise operations. For example:

```scala
import scala.compiletime.ops.int._

@main def Test =
  val t1: 1 << 1 = 2
  val t2: 1 << 2 = 4
  val t3: 1 << 3 = 8
  val t4: 1 << 4 = 0 // error
```

Above `t4` will fail to compile with the following error:

  -- [E007] Type Mismatch Error: /Users/kmetiuk/Projects/scala3/pg/release/snip_3.scala:7:20
7 |  val t67: 1 << 4 = 0 // error
  |                    ^
  |                    Found:    (0 : Int)
  |                    Required: (16 : Int)

You can find the list of all the supported operations in the `scala.compiletime.ops` [package](https://github.com/bishabosha/dotty/blob/e2b0de0bf70bbde5a9a92dc7fa91b36537b02a87/library/src/scala/compiletime/ops/package.scala)

# Syntactic Changes
## Context functions syntax improved

> In this release, we have done some work to improve the syntax of context function. Now, their syntax is closer to the one of the context parameters of methods.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this release, we have done some work to improve the syntax of context functions. Now, their syntax is closer to the syntax for context parameters of methods.
```

Previously, a context function was written as follows:

```scala
// OLD SYNTAX
val ctxFunOld = (x: String) ?=> x.toInt
```

Now, it is written as follows:

```scala
val ctxFunNew = (using x: String) => x.toInt
```

We hope that this change will improve the readability of context functions for a person who already knows the syntax for context parameters of ordinary methods.

## Drop `given` parameter syntax
As part of our experimentation with the syntax of the language, we are now dropping the old syntax for context parameters.

The old syntax for context parameters was as follows:

```scala
// OLD SYNTAX, NO LONGER SUPPORTED
def f(given x: Int) = x * x
```

In the previous release, it was [replaced](https://dotty.epfl.ch/blog/2020/02/05/22nd-dotty-milestone-release.html#further-improvements-to-the-context-parameters-syntax) by the new `using` syntax:

```scala
def f(using x: Int) = x * x
```

However, both syntaxes were supported for that release for experimental purposes. Now, we are dropping the support of the old syntax in favor of the new one as we see it as a clear win over the old one.

# Metaprogramming
## Inline version of `summon`

> When working from within an inline method, it is often the case that we want to summon a value without declaring it as a context parameter of the method:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Inside an inline method, we often want to summon a value without declaring it as a context parameter of the method:
```

We have now added an inline version of `summon`:

```scala
import scala.compiletime.summonInline

inline def lookup[X] =
  val x = summonInline[X]
  println(s"x = $x")

@main def Test =
  given Int = 10
  lookup[Int]
```

`summonInline` is an inline version of `summon`. It is defined as follows:

```scala
inline def summonInline[T] <: T = summonFrom {
  case t: T => t
}
```

Since it is inline, the context parameter is resolved on expansion site, not the call site. The expansion site happens to be wherever `lookup` function is expanded, and there the type `X` is bound to a concrete type.

## `ValueOfExpr` renamed to `Unlifted`
This feature allows you to obtain the value captured in an expression using pattern matching:

Macro.scala

```scala
import scala.quoted._

inline def square(inline x: Int): Int = ${ squareImpl('x) }
def squareImpl(x: Expr[Int])(using QuoteContext): Expr[Int] =
  x match
    case Unlifted(value: Int) => Expr(value * value)
```

Test.scala

```scala
@main def Test =
  println(square(10))  // 100
```

## Extractors for quotes moved under `scala.quoted` package

> The metaprogramming capabilities are undergoing simplifications in this release. Particularly, you need to do less imports to use them.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The metaprogramming capabilities are undergoing simplifications in this release. In particular, fewer imports are now needed.
```

Previously, to access the extractors for expressions you had to do the `scala.quoted.matching._` import. Now, the extractors from there have been moved to `scala.quoted`. For example, you can write the following program:

Macro.scala:

```scala
import scala.quoted._

> inline def square(x: Int): Int = ${ squareImpl('x) }

Author: ```suggestion
inline def square(inline x: Int): Int = ${ squareImpl('x) }
```
